General Information
===================

This is the first release of the GPL'ed version of CDLab, a piece of software
that burns CD's on Atari-compatible platforms.

CDLab used to be released as a shareware program, for two reasons :

1. At that time, I needed money.

2. I have signed non-disclosure agreements (NDA's) for some of the
documentation I got from some cd recorder manufacturers, thus I had not to
disclose the source code of the vendor-specific drivers. Releasing the CDLab
code without the drivers would have been useless, I guess. I could release a
MMC-only version of CDLab, but like I said before, I was in need of money.

Now that I'm rich and the five-year time limits of the NDA's have passed,
nothing prevents me from releasing the source code to the public. I chose to
release it under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence, in order to
protect the source code from people who would like to claim the property of the
code.

This version of CDLab is an unfinished release of version 0.90. Unfinished
because of the lack of time for writing the on-line documentation. In fact, the
code works, but the newest features of the software remains undocumented.


François Galea <zerkman@atari.org>


Installation
============

The source code is provided exactly as I found it in my Falcon's hard drive. I
just converted the source files to unix/latin1 text format, and added this
README file. I also added the legal stuff to make CDLab conform to the terms of
the GPL licence : the COPYING file was added, and all the original CDLab source
files have been marked by copyright terms, except those I borrowed from Steffen
Engel's sample source code for using the SCSIDrv interface. I guess it's not a
real problem, since those source files have been publicly released by their
author.

To compile the program, you'll have to link it to Dominique Bereziat's Windom
user interface library (http://windom.sourceforge.net/). I absolutely don't
know if the Windom API has changed since 1999, but there might be compatibility
issues. Just give it a try and check the compatibility issues inside the Windom
documentation if needed.


Acknowledgements
================

Without the help of some people, CDLab would not have been as great as it is
now. I would like to thank the people who lent/gave me CD burners, gave me
unestimable help with remote debugging, and gave me some precious information
about he handling of some weird cd burners. Thanks to all of you, you know who
you are.

I hope somebody will take the responsibility of starting an open source project
for enhancing that piece of software, that took me months and months of coding,
debugging, and documenting.





