4. Physical Characteristics

  This section contains the physical definition of SCSI-2.  The connectors, 
cables, signals, terminators, and bus timing values needed to implement the 
interface are covered.

4.1. Physical Description

  SCSI devices are daisy-chained together using a common 50-conductor A cable 
and, optionally, a 68-conductor B cable.  Both ends of each cable are 
terminated.  All signals are common between all SCSI devices on the A cable.  
In systems that employ the wide SCSI option, wide SCSI devices additionally 
connect to the B cable.  Various width SCSI devices may be mixed.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  X3T9.2 is documenting an alternate 16-bit single-cable 
  solution and an alternate 32-bit solution and expects to be able to remove 
  the B cable definition in a future version of SCSI.

  Two driver/receiver alternatives are specified:
  (1) Single-ended drivers and receivers, which allow a maximum cable length 
of six meters (primarily for connection within a cabinet).
  (2) Differential drivers and receivers, which allow a maximum cable length 
of 25 meters (primarily for connection outside of a cabinet).

  The single-ended and differential alternatives are mutually exclusive within 
a system.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  Use of single-ended drivers and receivers with the fast 
  synchronous data transfer option is not recommended.

4.2. Cable Requirements  

  The characteristic impedance of the cable should be no less than 90 ohms and 
no greater than 140 ohms.  The characteristic impedance of the cable used when 
implementing the fast synchronous data transfer option is defined in 4.2.3.

  NOTE:  There are successful single-ended implementations using cables with 
  with less than 90 ohms characteristic impedance.  However, system integrity 
  in single-ended implementations is improved when the characteristic 
  impedance of the cable is greater than 90 ohms.  Cable parameters other than 
  characteristic impedance are critical to system integrity.  The X3T9.2 Task 
  Group is investigating alternative ways to specify cable parameters as a 
  part of a future version of SCSI.

  A minimum conductor size of 0.08042 square mm (28 AWG) should be used to 
minimize noise effects and ensure proper distribution of terminator power.  
A smaller conductor size may be used for signals other than terminator power. 

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTES:
  (1) To minimize discontinuities and signal reflections, cables of different 
  impedances should not be used in the same bus.  Implementations may require 
  trade-offs in shielding effectiveness, cable length, the number of loads, 
  transfer rates, and cost to achieve satisfactory system operation. 
  (2) To minimize discontinuities due to local impedance variation, a flat 
  cable should be spaced at least 1.27 mm (0.050 in) from other cables, any 
  other conductor, or the cable itself when the cable is folded.
  (3) Regulatory agencies may require use of larger wire size.  

4.2.1. Single-Ended Cable

  A 50-conductor flat cable or 25-signal twisted-pair cable shall be used for 
the A cable.  A 68-conductor flat cable or 34-signal twisted-pair cable shall 
be used for the B cable if the wide SCSI option is implemented.  The maximum 
cumulative cable length shall be 6.0 meters.  If twisted-pair cables are used, 
then twisted pairs in the cable shall be wired to physically opposing contacts 
in the connector.

  A stub length of no more than 0.1 meters is allowed off the mainline 
interconnection within any connected equipment or from any connected point.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  Stub clustering should be avoided.  Stubs should be 
  spaced at least 0.3 meters apart.

  SCSI bus termination shall be at each end of the cable and may be internal 
to the SCSI devices that are at the ends of the cable.

4.2.2. Differential Cable

  A 50-conductor flat cable or 25-signal twisted-pair cable shall be used for 
the A cable.  A 68-conductor flat cable or 34-signal twisted-pair cable shall 
be used for the B cable if the wide SCSI option is implemented.  The maximum 
cumulative cable length shall be 25 meters.  If twisted-pair cables are used, 
then twisted pairs in the cable shall be wired to physically opposing contacts 
in the connector.

  A stub length of no more than 0.2 meters is allowed off the mainline 
interconnection within any connected equipment or from any connected point.

  SCSI bus termination shall be at each end of the cable and may be internal 
to the SCSI devices that are at the ends of the cable.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  The use of twisted pair cable (either twisted-flat or 
  discrete wire twisted pairs) is strongly recommended.  Without twisted 
  pairs, even at slow data rates and very short distances, crosstalk between 
  adjacent signals causes spurious pulses with differential signals.

4.2.3. Cable Requirements for Fast Synchronous Data Transfer

  In systems which use the fast synchronous data transfer option (see 4.8), 
the A and B cables should meet the conductor size recommendation in 4.2.  The 
cable should have an overall shield suitable for termination in a shielded 
connector.








  In such systems, the cables shall have the following electrical 
characteristics:
     Characteristic Impedance:  90 to 132 ohms
     Signal Attenuation:  0.095 dB maximum per meter at 5 MHz
     Pair-to-Pair Propagation Delay Delta:  0.20 ns maximum per meter
     DC Resistance:  0.230 ohms maximum per meter at 20 degrees C


4.3. Connector Requirements

  Two types of connectors are defined: nonshielded and shielded.  The 
nonshielded connectors are typically used for in-cabinet applications.  
Shielded connectors are typically used for external applications where 
electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) and electrostatic discharge (ESD) 
protection may be required.  Either type of connector may be used with the 
single-ended or differential drivers.

4.3.1. Nonshielded Connector Requirements

  Two nonshielded connector alternatives are specified for the A cable and one 
nonshielded connector is specified for the B cable.

4.3.1.1. Nonshielded Connector Alternative 1 - A Cable

  The alternative 1 nonshielded high-density SCSI device connector for the A 
cable (Figure 4-1) shall be a 50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 
25 female contacts with adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The 
nonmating portion of the connector is shown for reference only.

  The alternative 1 nonshielded high-density cable connector for the A cable 
(Figure 4-2) shall be a 50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 25 
male contacts with adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating 
portion of the connector is shown for reference only.

4.3.1.2. Nonshielded Connector Alternative 2 - A Cable

  The alternative 2 nonshielded low-density SCSI device connector for the A 
cable (Figure 4-3) shall be a 50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 
25 male pins with adjacent pins 2.54 mm (0.1 in) apart.  A shroud and header 
body should be used.  The nonmating portion of the connector is shown for 
reference only.

  The alternative 2 nonshielded low-density cable connector for the A cable 
(Figure 4-4) shall be a 50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 25 
female contacts with adjacent contacts 2.54 mm (0.1 in) apart.  It is 
recommended that keyed connectors be used.









4.3.1.3. Nonshielded Connector - B Cable

  The nonshielded high-density SCSI device connector for the B cable (Figure 
4-1) shall be a 68-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 34 female 
contacts with adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating 
portion of the connector is shown for reference only.

  The nonshielded high-density cable connector for the B cable (Figure 4-2) 
shall be a 68-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 34 male contacts 
with adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the 
connector is shown for reference only.

4.3.2. Shielded Connector Requirements

  Two shielded connector alternatives are specified for the A cable and one 
shielded connector is specified for the B cable.  The connector shielding 
system should provide a dc resistance of less than 10 milliohms from the 
cable shield at its termination point to the SCSI device enclosure.

  In order to support daisy-chain connections, SCSI devices that use shielded 
connectors should provide two shielded device connectors on the device 
enclosure.  These two connectors may be wired "one-to-one" with a stub to the 
SCSI device's drivers and receivers provided the maximum stub length is not 
violated.  Alternatively, two cables may be run from the two shielded 
connectors to the drivers and receivers so that the maximum stub length is not 
violated.  The length of the cable within the device enclosure is included 
when calculating the total cable length of the SCSI bus.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  SCSI-1 defined three shielded connector systems in an 
  appendix.  The alternative 1 shielded connector of SCSI-1 has been replaced 
  by a high-density connector in this standard.  The alternative 2 shielded 
  connector remains unchanged.  The EUROCARD Boxes shielded connector system 
  of SCSI-1 has been deleted in this standard.

4.3.2.1. Shielded Connector Alternative 1 - A Cable

  The shielded high-density SCSI device connector for the A cable (Figure 4-5) 
is a 50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 25 female contacts with 
adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the 
connector is shown for reference only.

  The shielded high-density cable connector for the A cable (Figure 4-6) is a 
50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 25 male contacts with 
adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the 
connector is shown for reference only.










4.3.2.2. Shielded Connector Alternative 2 - A Cable

  The shielded low-density device connector for the A cable (Figure 4-7) is a 
50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of ribbon contacts spaced 2.16 
mm (0.085 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the connector is shown for 
reference only.

  The shielded low-density cable connector for the A cable (Figure 4-8) is a 
50-conductor connector consisting of two rows of ribbon contacts spaced 2.16 
mm (0.085 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the connector is shown for 
reference only.

4.3.2.3. Shielded Connector - B Cable

  The shielded high-density SCSI device connector for the B cable (Figure 4-5) 
is a 68-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 34 female contacts with 
adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the 
connector is shown for reference only.

  The shielded high-density cable connector for the B cable (Figure 4-6) is a 
68-conductor connector consisting of two rows of 34 male contacts with 
adjacent contacts 1.27 mm (0.05 in) apart.  The nonmating portion of the 
connector is shown for reference only.




















































































   Figure 4-1: 50/68-Contact Nonshielded High-Density SCSI Device Connector
                              (A Cable/B Cable)





















































      Figure 4-2: 50/68-Contact Nonshielded High-Density Cable Connector
                              (A Cable/B Cable)





















































     Figure 4-3: 50-Contact Nonshielded Low-Density SCSI Device Connector
                                  (A Cable)





















































        Figure 4-4: 50-Contact Nonshielded Low-Density Cable Connector
                                  (A Cable)






















































    Figure 4-5: 50/68-Contact Shielded High-density SCSI Device Connector
                              (A Cable/B Cable)





















































       Figure 4-6: 50/68-Contact Shielded High-density Cable Connector
                              (A Cable/B Cable)





















































      Figure 4-7: 50-Contact Shielded Low-Density SCSI Device Connector






















































         Figure 4-8: 50-Contact Shielded Low-Density Cable Connector

4.3.3. Connector Contact Assignments

  The connector contact assignments are defined in Tables 4-1 through 4-5.  
Table 4-1 defines which of the other four tables to use and which set of 
contact assignments to use.

         Table 4-1: Cross-Reference to Connector Contact Assignments

==============================================================================
                              Driver/                        Contact
                             Receiver           Connector  Assignment  Contact
    Connector Type             Type      Cable    Figure      Table      Set
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nonshielded Alternative 1  Single-Ended    A    4-1 & 4-2      4-2        2
Nonshielded Alternative 1  Single-Ended    B    4-1 & 4-2      4-3
Nonshielded Alternative 1  Differential    A    4-1 & 4-2      4-4        2
Nonshielded Alternative 1  Differential    B    4-1 & 4-2      4-5

Nonshielded Alternative 2  Single-Ended    A    4-3 & 4-4      4-2        1
Nonshielded Alternative 2  Differential    A    4-3 & 4-4      4-4        1

Shielded Alternative 1     Single-Ended    A    4-5 & 4-6      4-2        2
Shielded Alternative 1     Single-Ended    B    4-5 & 4-6      4-3
Shielded Alternative 1     Differential    A    4-5 & 4-6      4-4        2
Shielded Alternative 1     Differential    B    4-5 & 4-6      4-5

Shielded Alternative 2     Single-Ended    A    4-7 & 4-8      4-2        2
Shielded Alternative 2     Differential    A    4-7 & 4-8      4-4        2
==============================================================================


























            Table 4-2: Single-Ended Contact Assignments - A Cable

==============================================================================
                  Connector         Cable        Connector
      Signal    Contact Number    Conductor    Contact Number    Signal      
       Name      Set 2  Set 1      Number       Set 1  Set 2      Name       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      GROUND       1      1         1 |  2        2     26       -DB(0)        
      GROUND       2      3         3 |  4        4     27       -DB(1)        
      GROUND       3      5         5 |  6        6     28       -DB(2)      
      GROUND       4      7         7 |  8        8     29       -DB(3)      
      GROUND       5      9         9 | 10       10     30       -DB(4)      
      GROUND       6     11        11 | 12       12     31       -DB(5)      
      GROUND       7     13        13 | 14       14     32       -DB(6)      
      GROUND       8     15        15 | 16       16     33       -DB(7)      
      GROUND       9     17        17 | 18       18     34       -DB(P)      
      GROUND      10     19        19 | 20       20     35       GROUND      
      GROUND      11     21        21 | 22       22     36       GROUND      
      RESERVED    12     23        23 | 24       24     37       RESERVED    
       OPEN       13     25        25 | 26       26     38       TERMPWR     
      RESERVED    14     27        27 | 28       28     39       RESERVED    
      GROUND      15     29        29 | 30       30     40       GROUND      
      GROUND      16     31        31 | 32       32     41       -ATN        
      GROUND      17     33        33 | 34       34     42       GROUND      
      GROUND      18     35        35 | 36       36     43       -BSY        
      GROUND      19     37        37 | 38       38     44       -ACK        
      GROUND      20     39        39 | 40       40     45       -RST        
      GROUND      21     41        41 | 42       42     46       -MSG        
      GROUND      22     43        43 | 44       44     47       -SEL        
      GROUND      23     45        45 | 46       46     48       -C/D        
      GROUND      24     47        47 | 48       48     49       -REQ        
      GROUND      25     49        49 | 50       50     50       -I/O        
==============================================================================

NOTES:
(1)  The minus sign next to a signal indicates active low.
(2)  The conductor number refers to the conductor position when using 0.050-
inch centerline flat ribbon cable with a low-density connector or when using 
0.025-inch centerline flat ribbon cable with a high-density connector.  Other 
cable types may be used to implement equivalent contact assignments.
(3)  Two sets of contact assignments are shown.  Refer to Table 4-1 to 
determine which set of contacts applies to each connector.
(4)  See 4.4.4 for a definition of the RESERVED lines.












            Table 4-3: Single-Ended Contact Assignments - B Cable

==============================================================================
                    Connector       Cable        Connector
      Signal         Contact      Conductor       Contact        Signal      
       Name           Number       Number          Number         Name       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      GROUND            1           1 |  2          35           GROUND  
      GROUND            2           3 |  4          36           -DB(8)    
      GROUND            3           5 |  6          37           -DB(9)  
      GROUND            4           7 |  8          38           -DB(10) 
      GROUND            5           9 | 10          39           -DB(11) 
      GROUND            6          11 | 12          40           -DB(12) 
      GROUND            7          13 | 14          41           -DB(13) 
      GROUND            8          15 | 16          42           -DB(14) 
      GROUND            9          17 | 18          43           -DB(15) 
      GROUND           10          19 | 20          44           -DB(P1) 
      GROUND           11          21 | 22          45           -ACKB   
      GROUND           12          23 | 24          46           GROUND  
      GROUND           13          25 | 26          47           -REQB   
      GROUND           14          27 | 28          48           -DB(16) 
      GROUND           15          29 | 30          49           -DB(17) 
      GROUND           16          31 | 32          50           -DB(18) 
     TERMPWRB          17          33 | 34          51           TERMPWRB
     TERMPWRB          18          35 | 36          52           TERMPWRB
      GROUND           19          37 | 38          53           -DB(19) 
      GROUND           20          39 | 40          54           -DB(20) 
      GROUND           21          41 | 42          55           -DB(21) 
      GROUND           22          43 | 44          56           -DB(22) 
      GROUND           23          45 | 46          57           -DB(23) 
      GROUND           24          47 | 48          58           -DB(P2) 
      GROUND           25          49 | 50          59           -DB(24) 
      GROUND           26          51 | 52          60           -DB(25) 
      GROUND           27          53 | 54          61           -DB(26) 
      GROUND           28          55 | 56          62           -DB(27) 
      GROUND           29          57 | 58          63           -DB(28) 
      GROUND           30          59 | 60          64           -DB(29) 
      GROUND           31          61 | 62          65           -DB(30) 
      GROUND           32          63 | 64          66           -DB(31) 
      GROUND           33          65 | 66          67           -DB(P3) 
      GROUND           34          67 | 68          68           GROUND  
==============================================================================

NOTES:
  (1)  The minus sign next to a signal indicates active low.
  (2)  The conductor number refers to the conductor position when using 0.025-
inch centerline flat ribbon cable.  Other cable types may be used to implement 
equivalent contact assignments.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  X3T9.2 is documenting an alternate 16-bit single-cable 
  solution and an alternate 32-bit solution and expects to be able to remove 
  the B cable definition in a future version of SCSI.



            Table 4-4: Differential Contact Assignments - A Cable

==============================================================================
                  Connector         Cable        Connector
      Signal    Contact Number    Conductor    Contact Number    Signal      
       Name      Set 2  Set 1      Number       Set 1  Set 2      Name       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      GROUND       1      1         1 |  2        2     26       GROUND 
      +DB(0)       2      3         3 |  4        4     27       -DB(0)       
      +DB(1)       3      5         5 |  6        6     28       -DB(1)     
      +DB(2)       4      7         7 |  8        8     29       -DB(2)     
      +DB(3)       5      9         9 | 10       10     30       -DB(3)     
      +DB(4)       6     11        11 | 12       12     31       -DB(4)     
      +DB(5)       7     13        13 | 14       14     32       -DB(5)     
      +DB(6)       8     15        15 | 16       16     33       -DB(6)     
      +DB(7)       9     17        17 | 18       18     34       -DB(7)     
      +DB(P)      10     19        19 | 20       20     35       -DB(P)     
      DIFFSENS    11     21        21 | 22       22     36       GROUND     
      RESERVED    12     23        23 | 24       24     37       RESERVED   
      TERMPWR     13     25        25 | 26       26     38       TERMPWR    
      RESERVED    14     27        27 | 28       28     39       RESERVED   
      +ATN        15     29        29 | 30       30     40       -ATN       
      GROUND      16     31        31 | 32       32     41       GROUND     
      +BSY        17     33        33 | 34       34     42       -BSY       
      +ACK        18     35        35 | 36       36     43       -ACK       
      +RST        19     37        37 | 38       38     44       -RST       
      +MSG        20     39        39 | 40       40     45       -MSG       
      +SEL        21     41        41 | 42       42     46       -SEL       
      +C/D        22     43        43 | 44       44     47       -C/D       
      +REQ        23     45        45 | 46       46     48       -REQ       
      +I/O        24     47        47 | 48       48     49       -I/O       
      GROUND      25     49        49 | 50       50     50       GROUND     
==============================================================================

NOTES:
  (1)  The conductor number refers to the conductor position when using 0.050-
inch centerline flat ribbon cable with a low-density connector or when using 
0.025-inch centerline flat ribbon cable with a high-density connector.  Other 
cable types may be used to implement equivalent contact assignments.
  (2)  Two sets of contact assignments are shown.  Refer to Table 4-1 to 
determine which set of contacts applies to each connector.
  (3)  See 4.4.4 for a definition of the RESERVED lines.













            Table 4-5: Differential Contact Assignments - B Cable

==============================================================================
                    Connector       Cable        Connector
      Signal         Contact      Conductor       Contact        Signal      
       Name           Number       Number          Number         Name       
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      GROUND            1           1 |  2          35           GROUND  
      +DB(8)            2           3 |  4          36           -DB(8)    
      +DB(9)            3           5 |  6          37           -DB(9)  
      +DB(10)           4           7 |  8          38           -DB(10) 
      +DB(11)           5           9 | 10          39           -DB(11) 
      +DB(12)           6          11 | 12          40           -DB(12) 
      +DB(13)           7          13 | 14          41           -DB(13) 
      +DB(14)           8          15 | 16          42           -DB(14) 
      +DB(15)           9          17 | 18          43           -DB(15) 
      +DB(P1)          10          19 | 20          44           -DB(P1) 
      +ACKB            11          21 | 22          45           -ACKB   
      GROUND           12          23 | 24          46           DIFFSENS
      +REQB            13          25 | 26          47           -REQB   
      +DB(16)          14          27 | 28          48           -DB(16) 
      +DB(17)          15          29 | 30          49           -DB(17) 
      +DB(18)          16          31 | 32          50           -DB(18) 
      TERMPWRB         17          33 | 34          51           TERMPWRB
      TERMPWRB         18          35 | 36          52           TERMPWRB
      +DB(19)          19          37 | 38          53           -DB(19) 
      +DB(20)          20          39 | 40          54           -DB(20) 
      +DB(21)          21          41 | 42          55           -DB(21) 
      +DB(22)          22          43 | 44          56           -DB(22) 
      +DB(23)          23          45 | 46          57           -DB(23) 
      +DB(P2)          24          47 | 48          58           -DB(P2) 
      +DB(24)          25          49 | 50          59           -DB(24) 
      +DB(25)          26          51 | 52          60           -DB(25) 
      +DB(26)          27          53 | 54          61           -DB(26) 
      +DB(27)          28          55 | 56          62           -DB(27) 
      +DB(28)          29          57 | 58          63           -DB(28) 
      +DB(29)          30          59 | 60          64           -DB(29) 
      +DB(30)          31          61 | 62          65           -DB(30) 
      +DB(31)          32          63 | 64          66           -DB(31) 
      +DB(P3)          33          65 | 66          67           -DB(P3) 
      GROUND           34          67 | 68          68           GROUND  
==============================================================================

NOTE:  The conductor number refers to the conductor position when using 0.025-
inch centerline flat ribbon cable.  Other cable types may be used to implement 
equivalent contact assignments.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  X3T9.2 is documenting an alternate 16-bit single-cable 
  solution and an alternate 32-bit solution and expects to be able to remove 
  the B cable definition in a future version of SCSI.





4.4. Electrical Description

  For the measurements in this section, SCSI bus termination is assumed to be 
external to the SCSI device.  See 4.4.1 for the terminating requirements for 
the RESERVED lines.  SCSI devices may have the provision for allowing optional 
internal termination.

4.4.1. Single-Ended Alternative

  All signals not defined as RESERVED, GROUND, or TERMPWR shall be terminated 
at both ends of the cable.  The implementor may choose one of the following 
two methods to terminate each end (see Figure 4-9):

  (1) The termination of each signal shall consist of 220 ohms (+_5%) to the 
TERMPWR line and 330 ohms (+_5%) to ground.  Using resistors with +_1% tolerance 
improves noise margins.
  (2) The termination of each signal shall meet these requirements:
     (a) The terminators shall each supply a characteristic impedance between 
  100 and 132 ohms. 
     (b) The terminators shall be powered by the TERMPWR line and may receive 
  additional power from other sources but shall not require such additional 
  power for proper operation (see 4.4.3).
     (c) The current available to any signal line driver shall not exceed 
  48 milliamps when the driver asserts the line and pulls it to 0.5 volts dc.  
  Only 44.8 mA of this current shall be available from the two terminators.
     (d) The voltage on all released signal lines shall be at least 2.5 volts 
  dc when the TERMPWR line is within specified values (see 4.4.3). 
     (e) These conditions shall be met with any legal configuration of targets 
  and initiators as long as at least one device is supplying TERMPWR.

  The first termination method above is the same as in SCSI-1.  The second 
termination method is recommended for better signal quality.

4.4.1.1. Output Characteristics
  All signals shall use open-collector or three-state drivers.  Each signal 
driven by an SCSI device shall have the following output characteristics when 
measured at the SCSI device's connector:
  VOL (Low-level output voltage) = 0.0 to 0.5 volts dc at 48 mA sinking 
                                   (signal assertion)
  VOH (High-level output voltage) = 2.5 to 5.25 volts dc (signal negation)

4.4.1.2. Input Characteristics
  SCSI devices with power on shall meet the following electrical 
characteristics on each signal (including both receivers and passive drivers):
  VIL (Low-level input voltage) = 0.0 to 0.8 volts dc (signal true)
  VIH (High-level input voltage) = 2.0 to 5.25 volts dc (signal false)
  IIL (Low-level input current) = -0.4 to 0.0 mA at VI = 0.5 volts dc
  IIH (High-level input current) = 0.0 to 0.1 mA at VI = 2.7 volts dc
  Minimum input hysteresis = 0.2 volts dc
  Maximum input capacitance = 25 pF (measured at the device connector closest 
                              to the stub, if any, within the device)

  It is recommended that SCSI devices with power off also meet the above IIL 
and IIH electrical characteristics on each signal.

  To achieve maximum noise immunity and to assure proper operation with 
complex cable configurations, it is recommended that the nominal switching 
threshold be approximately 1.4 volts.

4.4.2. Differential Alternative

  All signals consist of two lines denoted +SIGNAL and -SIGNAL.  A signal is 
true when +SIGNAL is more positive than -SIGNAL, and a signal is false when    
-SIGNAL is more positive than +SIGNAL.  All assigned signals of the A and B 
cables described in 4.6 shall be terminated at each end of the cable with a 
terminator network as shown in Figure 4-10.  Resistor tolerances in the 
terminator network shall be +_5% or less.

  The DIFFSENS signal of the connector is used as an active high enable for 
the differential drivers.  If a single-ended device or terminator is 
inadvertently connected, this signal is grounded, disabling the differential 
drivers (see Figure 4-11).

  The characteristic impedance of differential terminators is 122 ohms.

4.4.2.1. Output Characteristics
  Each signal driven by an SCSI device shall have the following output 
characteristics when measured at the SCSI device's connector:
  VOL (Low-level output voltage) = 1.7 V maximum at IOL (Low-level output 
                                   current) = 55 mA.
  VOH (High-level output voltage) = 2.7 V minimum at IOH (High-level output 
                                    current) = -55 mA.
  VOD (Differential output voltage) = 1.0 V minimum with common-mode voltage 
                                      ranges from -7 to +12 volts dc.

  VOL and VOH shall be as measured between the output terminal and the SCSI 
device's logic ground reference.

  The output characteristics shall additionally conform to ISO 8482.

4.4.2.2. Input Characteristics
  SCSI devices shall meet the following electrical characteristics on each 
signal (including both receivers and passive drivers):
  II (Input current on either input) = +_ 2.0 mA maximum.
  Maximum input capacitance = 25 pF.

  The II requirement shall be met with the input voltage varying between -7 
and +12 volts dc, with power on or off, and with the hysteresis equaling 35 
millivolts, minimum.

  The input characteristics shall additionally conform to ISO 8482.









4.4.3. Terminator Power

  SCSI initiators shall supply terminator power to the TERMPWR contact(s) and, 
if it implements the wide SCSI option, to the TERMPWRB contacts.  This power 
shall be supplied through a diode or similar semiconductor that prevents 
backflow of power to the SCSI device.  Targets and SCSI devices that become 
temporary initiators (e.g., targets which implement the COPY command or 
asynchronous event notification) are not required to supply terminator power.  
Any SCSI device may supply terminator power.  Interface error rates are lower 
if the termination voltage is maintained at the extreme ends of the cable.

  All terminators independent of location shall be powered from the TERMPWR 
and TERMPWRB contact(s).  The use of keyed connectors is recommended in SCSI 
devices that provide terminator power to prevent accidental grounding or 
the incorrect connection of terminator power.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE: Regulatory agencies may require limiting maximum (short 
  circuit) current to the terminator power lines.  Recommended current 
  limiting is 1.5 amperes for TERMPWR and 2 amperes for TERMPWRB.  For systems 
  utilizing multiple initiators, the initiators may be configured with option 
  straps or current limiting devices.  Maximum available current should not 
  exceed 5 amperes.

  SCSI devices shall sink no more than 1.0 mA from TERMPWR and no more than 
1.0 mA from TERMPWRB except to power an optional internal terminator.

  Single-ended SCSI devices providing terminator power on cable A shall have 
the following characteristics:
  VTerm = 4.25 to 5.25 volts dc
          900 mA minimum source drive capability

  Differential SCSI devices providing terminator power on cable A shall have 
the following characteristics:
  VTerm = 4.0 to 5.25 volts dc
          600 mA minimum source drive capability

   Single-ended SCSI devices providing terminator power on cable B shall have 
the following characteristics:
  VTerm = 4.25 to 5.25 volts dc
          1500 mA minimum source drive capability

  Differential SCSI devices providing terminator power on cable B shall have 
the following characteristics:
  VTerm = 4.0 to 5.25 volts dc
          1000 mA minimum source drive capability

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  It is recommended that the terminator power lines be 
  decoupled at each terminator with at least a 2.2 microfarad high-frequency 
  capacitor to improve signal quality.

























                          Alternative 1 Termination































                          Alternative 2 Termination

               Figure 4-9: Termination for Single-Ended Devices




















               Figure 4-10: Termination for Differential Devices




















              Figure 4-11: Differential Driver Protection Circuit

4.4.4. RESERVED Lines

  The lines labeled RESERVED in the A cable contact assignment tables (Table 
4-2 and Table 4-4) shall be connected to ground in the bus terminator 
assemblies or in the end devices on the SCSI cable.  The RESERVED lines should 
be open in the other SCSI devices, but may be connected to ground.







4.5. SCSI Bus

  Communication on the SCSI bus is allowed between only two SCSI devices at 
any given time.  There is a maximum of eight SCSI devices.  Each SCSI device 
has an SCSI ID bit assigned as shown in Figure 4-12.  Three sample system 
configurations are shown in Figure 4-13.

  When two SCSI devices communicate on the SCSI bus, one acts as an initiator 
and the other acts as a target.  The initiator originates an operation and the 
target performs the operation.  An SCSI device usually has a fixed role as an 
initiator or target, but some devices may be able to assume either role.

  An initiator may address up to eight peripheral devices that are connected 
to a target.  The target may be physically housed within the peripheral device 
in which case the peripheral device is referred to as an embedded SCSI device.

     DB(7) DB(6) DB(5) DB(4) DB(3) DB(2) DB(1) DB(0)  <-- DATA BUS
     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     SCSI ID = 0
     |     |     |     |     |     |     | 
     |     |     |     |     |     |     SCSI ID = 1
     |     |     |     |     |     |
     |     |     |     |     |     SCSI ID = 2
     |     |     |     |     |
     |     |     |     |     SCSI ID = 3
     |     |     |     |
     |     |     |     SCSI ID = 4
     |     |     |
     |     |     SCSI ID = 5
     |     |
     |     SCSI ID = 6
     |
     SCSI ID = 7



                           Figure 4-12: SCSI ID Bits







































































                    Figure 4-13: Sample SCSI Configurations

  Up to eight SCSI devices can be supported on the SCSI bus.  They can be any 
combination of initiators and targets provided there is at least one of each.

  Certain SCSI bus functions are assigned to the initiator and certain SCSI 
bus functions are assigned to the target.  The initiator may arbitrate for the 
SCSI bus and select a particular target.  The target may request the transfer 
of COMMAND, DATA, STATUS, or other information on the DATA BUS, and in some 
cases it may arbitrate for the SCSI bus and reselect an initiator for the 
purpose of continuing an operation.

  Information transfers on the DATA BUS are asynchronous and follow a defined 
REQ/ACK handshake protocol.  One byte of information may be transferred with 
each handshake on the A cable and, if the wide data transfer option is 
implemented, one or three bytes of information may be transferred with each 
handshake on the B cable.  An option is defined for synchronous data transfer.

4.6. SCSI Bus Signals

  There are a total of 18 signals on the A cable and 29 signals on the B 
cable.  A total of 11 signals are used for control and 36 are used for data 
(messages, commands, status, and data), including parity.  These signals are 
described as follows:

BSY (BUSY).  An "OR-tied" signal that indicates that the bus is being used.

SEL (SELECT).  An "OR-tied" signal used by an initiator to select a target or 
by a target to reselect an initiator.

  IMPLEMENTORS NOTE:  The SEL signal was not defined as "OR-tied" in SCSI-1.  
  It has been defined as "OR-tied" in SCSI-2 in anticipation of needing 
  another "OR-tied" signal for future standardization.  This does not cause an 
  operational problem in mixing SCSI-1 and SCSI-2 devices.

C/D  (CONTROL/DATA).  A signal driven by a target that indicates whether 
CONTROL or DATA information is on the DATA BUS.  True indicates CONTROL.

I/O (INPUT/OUTPUT).  A signal driven by a target that controls the direction 
of data movement on the DATA BUS with respect to an initiator. True indicates 
input to the initiator.  This signal is also used to distinguish between 
SELECTION and RESELECTION phases.

MSG (MESSAGE).  A signal driven by a target during the MESSAGE phase.

REQ (REQUEST).  A signal driven by a target on the A cable to indicate a 
request for a REQ/ACK data transfer handshake.

REQB (REQUEST).  A signal driven by a target on the B cable to indicate a 
request for a REQB/ACKB data transfer handshake.

ACK (ACKNOWLEDGE).  A signal driven by an initiator on the A cable to indicate 
an acknowledgment for a REQ/ACK data transfer handshake.

ACKB (ACKNOWLEDGE).  A signal driven by an initiator on the B cable to 
indicate an acknowledgment for a REQB/ACKB data transfer handshake.

ATN (ATTENTION).  A signal driven by an initiator to indicate the ATTENTION 
condition.

RST (RESET).  An "OR-tied" signal that indicates the RESET condition.

DB(7-0,P) (DATA BUS).  Eight data-bit signals, plus a parity-bit signal that 
form a DATA BUS.  DB(7) is the most significant bit and has the highest 
priority during the ARBITRATION phase.  Bit number, significance, and priority 
decrease downward to DB(0).  A data bit is defined as one when the signal 
value is true and is defined as zero when the signal value is false.  Data 
parity DB(P) shall be odd.  Parity is undefined during the ARBITRATION phase.

DB(31-8,P1,P2,P3) (DATA BUS).  Twenty-four data-bit signals, plus three 
parity-bit signals that form an extension to the DATA BUS.   DB(P1,P2,P3) are 
parity bits for DB(15-8), DB(23-16), and DB(31-24) respectively.  A data bit 
is defined as one when the signal value is true and is defined as zero when 
the signal value is false.  Data parity DB(Px) shall be odd.  

4.6.1. Signal Values

  Signals may assume true or false values.  There are two methods of driving 
these signals.  In both cases, the signal shall be actively driven true, or 
asserted.  In the case of OR-tied drivers, the driver does not drive the 
signal to the false state, rather the bias circuitry of the bus terminators 
pulls the signal false whenever it is released by the drivers at every SCSI 
device.  If any driver is asserted, then the signal is true.  In the case of 
non-OR-tied drivers, the signal may be actively driven false.  In this 
standard, wherever the term negated is used, it means that the signal may be 
actively driven false, or may be simply released (in which case the bias 
circuitry pulls it false), at the option of the implementor.  The advantage to 
actively driving signals false during information transfer is that the 
transition from true to false occurs more quickly and the noise margin is much 
higher than if the signal is simply released.  This facilitates reliable data 
transfer at high rates, especially at the longer cable lengths used with 
differential drivers. 

4.6.2. OR-Tied Signals

  The BSY, SEL, and RST signals shall be OR-tied only.  In the ordinary 
operation of the bus, the BSY and RST signals may be simultaneously driven 
true by several drivers.  No signals other than BSY, RST, and DB(P) are 
simultaneously driven by two or more drivers, and any signal other than BSY, 
SEL, and RST may employ OR-tied or non-OR-tied drivers.  DB(P) shall not be 
driven false during the ARBITRATION phase but may be driven false in other 
phases.  There is no operational problem in mixing OR-tied and non-OR-tied 
drivers on signals other than BSY and RST.









4.6.3. Signal Sources

  Table 4-6 indicates which type of SCSI device is allowed to source each 
signal.  No attempt is made to show if the source is driving asserted, driving 
negated, or is passive.  All SCSI device drivers that are not active sources 
shall be in the passive state.  The RST signal may be asserted by any SCSI 
device at any time.


                          Table 4-6: Signal Sources

==============================================================================
                         A Cable Signals                B Cable Signals
                 -------------------------------    ------------------------
                             C/D,
                             I/O,
                             MSG,  ACK,  DB(7-0)                DB(31-8),
  Bus Phase      BSY   SEL   REQ   ATN   DB(P)      REQB  ACKB  DB(P1,P2,P3)
  -----------    ----  ----  ----  ----  -------    ----  ----  ------------
  BUS FREE       None  None  None  None  None       None  None  None
  ARBITRATION    All   Win   None  None  S ID       None  None  None
  SELECTION      I&T   Init  None  Init  Init       None  None  None
  RESELECTION    I&T   Targ  Targ  Init  Targ       None  None  None
  COMMAND        Targ  None  Targ  Init  Init       None  None  None
  DATA IN        Targ  None  Targ  Init  Targ       Targ  Init  Targ
  DATA OUT       Targ  None  Targ  Init  Init       Targ  Init  Init
  STATUS         Targ  None  Targ  Init  Targ       None  None  None
  MESSAGE IN     Targ  None  Targ  Init  Targ       None  None  None
  MESSAGE OUT    Targ  None  Targ  Init  Init       None  None  None
==============================================================================


All:    The signal shall be driven by all SCSI devices that are actively 
        arbitrating.

S ID:   A unique data bit (the SCSI ID) shall be driven by each SCSI device 
        that is actively arbitrating; the other seven data bits shall be 
        released (i.e., not driven) by this SCSI device.  The parity bit 
        (DB(P)) may be released or driven to the true state, but shall never 
        be driven to the false state during this phase.

I&T:    The signal shall be driven by the initiator, target, or both, as 
        specified in the SELECTION phase and RESELECTION phase.

Init:   If driven, this signal shall be driven only by the active initiator.

None:   The signal shall be released; that is, not be driven by any SCSI 
        device.  The bias circuitry of the bus terminators pulls the signal to 
        the false state.

Win:    The signal shall be driven by the one SCSI device that wins 
        arbitration.

Targ:   If the signal is driven, it shall be driven only by the active target.


4.7. SCSI Bus Timing

  Unless otherwise indicated, the delay-time measurements for each SCSI 
device, shown in Table 4-7, shall be calculated from signal conditions 
existing at that SCSI device's own SCSI bus connection.  Thus, these 
measurements (except cable skew delay) can be made without considering delays 
in the cable.  The timing characteristics of each signal are described in the 
following paragraphs.

                      Table 4-7: SCSI Bus Timing Values

        ==============================================================
        Arbitration Delay . . . . . . . . 2.4 microseconds
        Assertion Period  . . . . . . . .  90 nanoseconds
        Bus Clear Delay . . . . . . . . . 800 nanoseconds
        Bus Free Delay  . . . . . . . . . 800 nanoseconds
        Bus Set Delay . . . . . . . . . . 1.8 microseconds
        Bus Settle Delay  . . . . . . . . 400 nanoseconds
        Cable Skew Delay  . . . . . . . .  10 nanoseconds
        Data Release Delay  . . . . . . . 400 nanoseconds
        Deskew Delay  . . . . . . . . . .  45 nanoseconds  
        Disconnection Delay . . . . . . . 200 microseconds
        Hold Time . . . . . . . . . . . .  45 nanoseconds
        Negation Period . . . . . . . . .  90 nanoseconds
        Power-On to Selection Time  . . .  10 seconds recommended
        Reset to Selection Time . . . . . 250 milliseconds recommended
        Reset Hold Time . . . . . . . . .  25 microseconds
        Selection Abort Time  . . . . . . 200 microseconds
        Selection Time-out Delay  . . . . 250 milliseconds recommended
        Transfer Period . . . . . . . . . set during an SDTR message
        Fast Assertion Period . . . . . .  30 nanoseconds
        Fast Cable Skew Delay . . . . . .   5 nanoseconds
        Fast Deskew Delay . . . . . . . .  20 nanoseconds
        Fast Hold Time  . . . . . . . . .  10 nanoseconds
        Fast Negation Period  . . . . . .  30 nanoseconds
        ==============================================================


4.7.1. Arbitration Delay 

  The minimum time an SCSI device shall wait from asserting BSY for 
arbitration until the DATA BUS can be examined to see if arbitration has been 
won.  There is no maximum time.

4.7.2. Assertion Period 

  The minimum time that a target shall assert REQ (or REQB) while using 
synchronous data transfers.  Also, the minimum time that an initiator shall 
assert ACK (or ACKB) while using synchronous data transfers.  REQB and ACKB 
timings only apply to optional wide data transfers. 




4.7.3. Bus Clear Delay 

  The maximum time for an SCSI device to stop driving all bus signals after:
  (1) The BUS FREE phase is detected (BSY and SEL both false for a bus settle 
  delay)
  (2) SEL is received from another SCSI device during the ARBITRATION phase
  (3) The transition of RST to true.

  For the first condition above, the maximum time for an SCSI device to clear 
the bus is 1200 nanoseconds from BSY and SEL first becoming both false.  If an 
SCSI device requires more than a bus settle delay to detect BUS FREE phase, it 
shall clear the bus within a bus clear delay minus the excess time.

4.7.4. Bus Free Delay 

  The minimum time that an SCSI device shall wait from its detection of the 
BUS FREE phase (BSY and SEL both false for a bus settle delay) until its 
assertion of BSY when going to the ARBITRATION phase.

4.7.5. Bus Set Delay 

  The maximum time for an SCSI device to assert BSY and its SCSI ID bit on the 
DATA BUS after it detects BUS FREE phase (BSY and SEL both false for a bus 
settle delay) for the purpose of entering the ARBITRATION phase.

4.7.6. Bus Settle Delay 

  The minimum time to wait for the bus to settle after changing certain 
control signals as called out in the protocol definitions.

4.7.7. Cable Skew Delay 

  The maximum difference in propagation time allowed between any two SCSI bus 
signals measured between any two SCSI devices.

4.7.8. Data Release Delay 

  The maximum time for an initiator to release the DATA BUS signals following 
the transition of the I/O signal from false to true.

4.7.9. Deskew Delay 

  The minimum time required for deskew of certain signals.

4.7.10. Disconnection Delay 

  The minimum time that a target shall wait after releasing BSY before 
participating in an ARBITRATION phase when honoring a DISCONNECT message from 
the initiator.






4.7.11. Hold Time 

  The minimum time added between the assertion of REQ (or REQB) or ACK (or 
ACKB) and the changing of the data lines to provide hold time in the initiator 
or target while using synchronous data transfers.  REQB and ACKB timings only 
apply to optional wide data transfers. 

4.7.12. Negation Period 

  The minimum time that a target shall negate REQ (or REQB) while using 
synchronous data transfers.  Also, the minimum time that an initiator shall 
negate ACK (or ACKB) while using synchronous data transfers.  REQB and ACKB 
timings only apply to optional wide data transfers. 

4.7.13. Power-On to Selection Time 

  The recommended maximum time from power application until an SCSI target is 
able to respond with appropriate status and sense data to the TEST UNIT READY, 
INQUIRY, and REQUEST SENSE commands.

4.7.14. Reset to Selection Time 

  The recommended maximum time after a hard RESET condition until an SCSI 
target is able to respond with appropriate status and sense data to the TEST 
UNIT READY, INQUIRY, and REQUEST SENSE commands.

4.7.15. Reset Hold Time 

  The minimum time for which RST is asserted.  There is no maximum time.

4.7.16. Selection Abort Time 

  The maximum time that a target (or initiator) shall take from its most 
recent detection of being selected (or reselected) until asserting a BSY 
response.  This time-out is required to ensure that a target (or initiator) 
does not assert BSY after a SELECTION (or RESELECTION) phase has been aborted.  
This is not the selection time-out period; see 5.1.3.1 and 5.1.4.2 for a 
complete description.

4.7.17. Selection Time-out Delay 

  The minimum time that an initiator (or target) should wait for a BSY 
response during the SELECTION (or RESELECTION) phase before starting the time-
out procedure.  Note that this is only a recommended time period.

4.7.18. Transfer Period 

  The Transfer Period specifies the minimum time allowed between the leading 
edges of successive REQ pulses and of successive ACK pulses while using 
synchronous data transfers.  (See 5.1.5.2 and 5.6.21.)





4.8. Fast Synchronous Transfer Option

  When devices negotiate a synchronous data transfer period of less than 200 
ns they are said to be using "fast synchronous data transfers".  Devices which 
negotiate a synchronous data transfer period greater than 200 ns use timing 
parameters specified in 4.7.  When a fast synchronous data transfer period is 
negotiated, those specific times redefined in this section are used; those not 
redefined remain the same.  The minimum synchronous data transfer period is 
100 ns.

4.8.1. Fast Assertion Period 

  This value is the minimum time that a target shall assert REQ (or REQB) 
while using fast synchronous data transfers.  Also, the minimum time that an 
initiator shall assert ACK (or ACKB) while using fast synchronous data 
transfers.  REQB and ACKB timings only apply to optional wide data transfers. 

4.8.2. Fast Cable Skew Delay 

  This value is the maximum difference in propagation time allowed between any 
two SCSI bus signals measured between any two SCSI devices while using fast 
synchronous data transfers.

4.8.3. Fast Deskew Delay 

  This value is the minimum time required for deskew of certain signals while 
using fast synchronous data transfers.

4.8.4. Fast Hold Time 

  This value is the minimum time added between the assertion of REQ (or REQB) 
or ACK (or ACKB) and the changing of the data lines to provide hold time in 
the initiator or target, respectively, while using fast synchronous data 
transfers.  REQB and ACKB timings only apply to optional wide data transfers. 

4.8.5. Fast Negation Period 

  This value is the minimum time that a target shall negate REQ (or REQB) 
while using fast synchronous data transfers.  Also, the minimum time that an 
initiator shall negate ACK (or ACKB) while using fast synchronous data 
transfers.  REQB and ACKB timings only apply to optional wide data transfers. 














